Optimize prometheus vs grafana (#232)
SigNoz/signoz-web: data/comparisons/prometheus-vs-grafana.mdx

---
title: Prometheus vs Grafana - Which Tool is Right for You?
slug: prometheus-vs-grafana

> date: 2024-02-27

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2024-06-11
```

@yuvraajsj18 we should also update the date when we update an old blog.

Author: Noted.

toc_max_heading_level: 2
keywords: [prometheus,grafana,opentelemetry,open-source,monitoring-tools,signoz]
---

<head>
<link rel="canonical" href="https://signoz.io/comparisons/prometheus-vs-grafana/"/>
</head>

Prometheus and Grafana are popularly used tools for monitoring applications and systems. Prometheus specializes in robust metric collection, monitoring, and alerting, while Grafana excels in data visualization and dashboarding. 

Together, they form a powerful duo, allowing users to monitor their systems effectively, analyze metrics comprehensively, and visualize insights intuitively, but how well do these tools perform individually in the Prometheus vs Grafana comparison?

<Admonition type="info">
💡 I configured a sample PHP application alongside a MySQL database and sent their data to Prometheus and Grafana for evaluation. Some takeaways are subjective and based on personal preference.
</Admonition>

<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
<img className="box-shadowed-image" src="/img/blog/2024/02/prometheus-vs-grafana-cover.webp" alt=""/>
</figure>

> In this article, I have discussed difference between prometheus and grafana on important features like data collection, visualization capabilities, data query, data storage, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, I have discussed the differences between Prometheus and Grafana regarding important features like data collection, visualization capabilities, data query, and data storage.
```

## A better Prometheus and Grafana Alternative: SigNoz

SigNoz is a full-stack open-source application performance monitoring and observability tool that serves as an excellent Prometheus and Grafana alternative. 

> **Why SigNoz?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Why SigNoz?**
```

In the preview, a line-break is not coming after `Why SigNoz?`

</figure>

Some of the key features of SigNoz are:

* **Comprehensive Monitoring**: Out-of-the-box charts for application metrics such as request latency, and custom dashboards for monitoring infrastructure.
* **Effortless Correlation**: Easily correlate metrics and traces with a single click, simplifying root cause analysis and performance troubleshooting.
* **Built-in Alerting**: In-built alerting feature that ensures you are promptly notified of any anomalies or performance issues.
* **Seamless Integration**: Support for Prometheus remote read, facilitating a smooth transition from Prometheus to SigNoz for metrics monitoring.
* **Advanced Log Management**: Excellent log management capabilities with features like a log query builder, multi-field search, structured table views, and JSON views.
* **Native OpenTelemetry Support**: Native integration with OpenTelemetry, aligning with the industry standard for telemetry data.
* **End-to-End Tracing**: End-to-end distributed tracing to gain complete visibility of your services.
* **High-Performance Database**: Utilizes Clickhouse, a high-performance OLAP database, for efficient data ingestion and aggregation.

> For a detailed comparison between Grafana and SigNoz, check out [this comprehensive article.](https://signoz.io/comparisons/prometheus-vs-grafana/#prometheus-vs-grafana-overview)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a detailed comparison between Grafana and SigNoz, check out [this comprehensive article.](https://signoz.io/product-comparison/signoz-vs-grafana/)
```

## Getting Started with SigNoz

<GetStartedSigNoz />

## FAQs

We have answered a few common questions that developers often have around Prometheus and Grafana below:

### Is Prometheus the same as Grafana?
No, Prometheus and Grafana serve different purposes. Prometheus is used for metrics collection and monitoring, while Grafana excels in data visualization and dashboarding.

### Is it possible to use Grafana without Prometheus?
Yes, Grafana supports a wide range of data sources and can be used without Prometheus.

### What is the difference between Grafana and Prometheus and Kibana?
Prometheus is a monitoring tool for metrics, Grafana is a visualization tool for various data sources, and Kibana is a visualization tool specifically for Elasticsearch data.

### What is Prometheus and Grafana in DevOps?
Prometheus and Grafana are used in DevOps for monitoring and visualizing application and system metrics, aiding in performance analysis and alerting.

### What is Prometheus used for?
Prometheus is used for collecting and storing metrics data, which helps in monitoring the performance and health of applications and infrastructure.

### Why is it called Prometheus?

> Prometheus is named after the Greek Titan who gave fire to humans, symbolizing the tool's role in providing vital monitoring capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prometheus is named after the Greek Titan who gave fire to humans, symbolizing the tool's role in providing vital monitoring capabilities.
```

are you sure about this @yuvraajsj18

Author: "Prometheus" actual meaning is that.

https://cult.honeypot.io/reads/prometheus-oss-the-god-of-fire-and-the-tool-of-thunder/

Not a necessary question tho, will remove if any second thoughts.
